README.md, before:

# TouchFaders MIDI

GitHub repo for TouchFaders MIDI program, developed by Craig Anderson

## What is this?
The YAMAHA® LS9 digital mixing console for audio is a fantastically capable device. There exists three issues with it:

1. No DCA's is a very unfortunate omission, especially considering the M7CL series has them (and released a year earlier!)
1. Input-to-Matrix is not supported ☹ (again, M7CL getting all the love)
1. Only one remote device can control the desk at a time (and the only mobile device that can do so is an iPad, with the StageMix app from YAMAHA®)

Unfortunately, I can't easily fix 1 or 2, so instead I decided to focus my efforts on 3.  
*This program is the solution*

## How does it work?
It uses the MIDI (v1) protocol to communicate to the console, and then forwards appropriate data to the specified OSC devices  
Requests received from OSC devices are also issued to the console on their behalf, as MIDI

## Instructions for use:
You need:
* A USB to MIDI adapter / cable/ interface (to make the PC talk to the console)
  * Alternatively, you can attempt to use the Network MIDI driver from YAMAHA® (Network driver v1.2.4 is compatible with Win10 2004), which you would use with Studio Manager
* A computer
* A wireless LAN network
* Mobile device(s) with the TouchOSC app installed
* An appropriate layout file for TouchOSC
  * Conversely, you can create your own layout / app, or head to http://github.com/theonlytechnohead/TouchFaders_APP and try out my WIP app

Once that's all done, follow the below steps:
1. Connect the computer and console, using the MIDI ports on the console, or the network driver
1. Enable MIDI SysEx on the console
    1. In the DISPLAY ACCESS section, press the [SETUP] key repeatedly to access the MISC SETUP screen within the SETUP screens
    1. Move the cursor to the MIDI SETUP popup button, and press the [ENTER] key to access the MIDI SETUP popup window
    1. Use the [INC] and [DEC] keys or the data wheel to change the PORT/CH field to 'MIDI'f for both Tx and Rx
    1. Set an appropriate device ID (1 - 16) in the field below the port selection. Please use the same ID for both Tx and Rx
    1. Move the cursor to the Tx and Rx buttons, toggling each so that the 'Parameter Change' Tx and Rx buttons are lit, and all other Tx, Rx, and ECHO buttons are dark
1. Open the TouchFaders MIDI program on the computer
1. Select the appropriate MIDI ports from the 'MIDI input device' and 'MIDI outuput device' lists
1. Click 'Start MIDI' (or press the 'S' key). The app will now sync with the console
1. Click 'Add device' to open the device dialog
    1. Fill in an appropriate name for the device (all devices must be named, names do not need to be unique)
    1. Enter an available listen port (must be unique, recommended to start at 8000 and go up by 1 for each device)
    1. Enter the devices IP address (the TouchOSC app also provides this for you in it's configuration settings)
    1. Enter an available send port (must be unqie, recommended to start at 9000 and go up by 1 for each device)
    1. Click 'Add OSC device" to confirm
1. Once all the required remote devices have been added, click 'Refresh OSC' to sync them (or press the 'O' key)
1. You're done! Except... it's up to you to setup and configure the TouchOSC app or my app to work accordingly.
See https://hexler.net/products/touchosc for details on how to configure TouchOSC

## How did I make this happen?
A lot of research and frustration.
Maybe a story... soon.

## Todo
- [x] Add general config file for storing data about settings
- [x] Implement 'versioning' and settings for other config files
- [x] Add UI to adjust settings
- [x] Update 'Add device' dialog UI to be scalable, rearrange vertically
- [x] ~~Find the MIDI command for the 'selected channel' info~~ Does not exist 😢
  - [x] ~~Implement 'selected channel' status into main window UI~~
- [x] User configurable device ID
- [ ] User configurable mixes (50%, still untested)
- [ ] User configurable channels (50%, still untested)
- [ ] User configurable channel linking, or getting channel link groups from the console
- [x] Support LS9-16
- [x] Channel configuration editor
 - [x] Channel names
 - [x] Channel link group
- [ ] Selected channel information, take two (50%)
  - [x] Channel level
  - [ ] Channel name (in progress, decoding)
  - [ ] Channel colour (I've got the colours, but I'm not requesting them yet)
  - [ ] Channel icon (I've got the icons, just need editing and displaying)
- [ ] WinAPI audio session control via MIDI! (50%)
  - [ ] Console -> PC (volume yes, mute no)
  - [ ] PC -> Console
- [x] zerOSConf implementation!
- [x] Mix metering data
  - [x] Get detailed data
  - [x] Broadcast detailed data

## I'm interested in the code, how does it work? Can I re-use it?
It's fully open-source, look all you like.
You're welcome to clone it for a closer look, but please don't redistribute this code, or any modified code (except as a pull request to this repository)  
If you really like it and want to do more with it, go make your own project! Use this as the functional example I didn't have, and go make even something cooler  
That's not a legal licence, but also it's not like I can stop you anyway

## I can make this so much better
Please make a pull request when you do, otherwise suggestions via the 'Issues' tab are appreciated

---
"Yamaha" is a registered trademark of Yamaha Corporation.

Commit message:

Testing testing testing!
Check the readme changes for the actual changelog

README.md, after:

# TouchFaders MIDI

GitHub repo for TouchFaders MIDI program, developed by Craig Anderson

## What is this?
The YAMAHA® LS9 digital mixing console for audio is a fantastically capable device. There exists three issues with it:

1. No DCA's is a very unfortunate omission, especially considering the M7CL series has them (and released a year earlier!)
1. Input-to-Matrix is not supported ☹ (again, M7CL getting all the love)
1. Only one remote device can control the desk at a time (and the only mobile device that can do so is an iPad, with the StageMix app from YAMAHA®)

Unfortunately, I can't easily fix 1 or 2, so instead I decided to focus my efforts on 3.  
*This program is the solution*

## How does it work?
It uses the MIDI (v1) protocol to communicate to the console, and then forwards appropriate data to the specified OSC devices  
Requests received from OSC devices are also issued to the console on their behalf, as MIDI

## Instructions for use:
You need:
* A USB to MIDI adapter / cable/ interface (to make the PC talk to the console)
  * Alternatively, you can attempt to use the Network MIDI driver from YAMAHA® (Network driver v1.2.4 is compatible with Win10 2004), which you would use with Studio Manager
* A computer
* A wireless LAN network
* Mobile device(s) with the TouchOSC app installed
* An appropriate layout file for TouchOSC
  * Conversely, you can create your own layout / app, or head to http://github.com/theonlytechnohead/TouchFaders_APP and try out my WIP app

Once that's all done, follow the below steps:
1. Connect the computer and console, using the MIDI ports on the console, or the network driver
1. Enable MIDI SysEx on the console
    1. In the DISPLAY ACCESS section, press the [SETUP] key repeatedly to access the MISC SETUP screen within the SETUP screens
    1. Move the cursor to the MIDI SETUP popup button, and press the [ENTER] key to access the MIDI SETUP popup window
    1. Use the [INC] and [DEC] keys or the data wheel to change the PORT/CH field to 'MIDI'f for both Tx and Rx
    1. Set an appropriate device ID (1 - 16) in the field below the port selection. Please use the same ID for both Tx and Rx
    1. Move the cursor to the Tx and Rx buttons, toggling each so that the 'Parameter Change' Tx and Rx buttons are lit, and all other Tx, Rx, and ECHO buttons are dark
1. Open the TouchFaders MIDI program on the computer
1. Select the appropriate MIDI ports from the 'MIDI input device' and 'MIDI outuput device' lists
1. Click 'Start MIDI' (or press the 'S' key). The app will now sync with the console
1. Click 'Add device' to open the device dialog
    1. Fill in an appropriate name for the device (all devices must be named, names do not need to be unique)
    1. Enter an available listen port (must be unique, recommended to start at 8000 and go up by 1 for each device)
    1. Enter the devices IP address (the TouchOSC app also provides this for you in it's configuration settings)
    1. Enter an available send port (must be unqie, recommended to start at 9000 and go up by 1 for each device)
    1. Click 'Add OSC device" to confirm
1. Once all the required remote devices have been added, click 'Refresh OSC' to sync them (or press the 'O' key)
1. You're done! Except... it's up to you to setup and configure the TouchOSC app or my app to work accordingly.
See https://hexler.net/products/touchosc for details on how to configure TouchOSC

## How did I make this happen?
A lot of research and frustration.
Maybe a story... soon.

## Todo
- [x] Add general config file for storing data about settings
- [x] Implement 'versioning' and settings for other config files
- [x] Add UI to adjust settings
- [x] Update 'Add device' dialog UI to be scalable, rearrange vertically
- [x] ~~Find the MIDI command for the 'selected channel' info~~ Does not exist 😢
  - [x] ~~Implement 'selected channel' status into main window UI~~
- [x] User configurable device ID
- [X] User configurable mixes (you need reconnect devices to update changes)
- [x] User configurable channels (as above)
- [ ] User configurable channel linking, or getting channel link groups from the console
- [x] Support LS9-16
- [x] Channel configuration editor
 - [x] Channel names
 - [x] Channel link group
- [ ] Selected channel information, take two (50%)
  - [x] Channel level
  - [ ] Channel name (in progress, decoding)
  - [ ] Channel colour (I've got the colours, but I'm not requesting them yet)
  - [ ] Channel icon (I've got the icons, just need editing and displaying)
- [ ] WinAPI audio session control via MIDI! (50%)
  - [ ] Console -> PC (volume yes, mute no)
  - [ ] PC -> Console
- [x] zerOSConf implementation!
- [x] Mix metering data
  - [x] Get detailed data
  - [x] Broadcast detailed data

## I'm interested in the code, how does it work? Can I re-use it?
It's fully open-source, look all you like.
You're welcome to clone it for a closer look, but please don't redistribute this code, or any modified code (except as a pull request to this repository)  
If you really like it and want to do more with it, go make your own project! Use this as the functional example I didn't have, and go make even something cooler  
That's not a legal licence, but also it's not like I can stop you anyway

## I can make this so much better
Please make a pull request when you do, otherwise suggestions via the 'Issues' tab are appreciated

---
"Yamaha" is a registered trademark of Yamaha Corporation.
